# IMO 2011 N5 (P5)

Let $G$ be an (additive) abelian group.
Let $f : G \to \N^+$ be a function such that $f(x - y) \mid f(x) - f(y)$ for any $x, y \in G$.
Prove that for any $x, y \in G$, if $f(x) \leq f(y)$, then $f(x) \mid f(y)$.

## Extra

Find all functions $f : G \to \N^+$ such that $f(x - y) \mid f(x) - f(y)$ for any $x, y \in G$.



# Answer for the extra part

Let $G = G_0 > G_1 > \ldots > G_k$ be an arbitrary strict chain of subgroups, $k \geq 0$.
Let $n_0, n_1, \ldots, n_k$ be an arbitrary sequence of positive integers such that $n_i < n_{i + 1}$ and $n_i \mid n_{i + 1}$ for each $0 \leq i < k$.
Then the function $f = x \mapsto n_{i(x)}$, where $i(x) = \max\{i : x \in G_i\}$, is good.
Futhermore, all good functions can be described as above.



# Solution

Official solution: <https://www.imo-official.org/problems/IMO2011SL.pdf>

We follow Solution 1 of the official solution.
The solution still works when the domain $\Z$ is replaced by an arbitrary group.

## Solution for the extra part

While the answer for the extra part appears in the comment section after Solution 2, the solution for the extra part does not.
Here we describe one possible solution.

First, we prove that all good functions can be described as in the answer.

For any $x \in G$, plugging $y = 0$ yields $f(x) \mid f(0)$.
In particular, $f(x) \leq f(0)$, so the image of $f$ is bounded and thus finite.
Let $n_0 < n_1 < \ldots < n_k$ be the elements of $f(G)$.
By the original part, we have $n_i \mid n_{i + 1}$ for all $0 \leq i < k$.

Now, for each $0 \leq i \leq k$, let $G_i = \{x : G | n_i \mid f(x)\}$.
Clearly, we have $G_i \supseteq G_{i + 1}$ for all $i < k$.
However, if $G_i = G_{i + 1}$ for some $i < k$, then we have $n_i \mid f(x) \implies n_{i + 1} \mid f(x)$ for any $x \in G$.
This cannot be true as $n_i \in f(G)$.
Thus, we have $G_i \supsetneq G_{i + 1}$ for any $i < k$.
It remains to prove that each $G_i$ is a group.

Fix some $0 \leq i \leq k$.
Plugging in $x = 0$ yields $f(y) \mid f(-y)$ for any $y \in G$.
In particular, for any $y \in G_i$, we have $-y \in G_i$.
Finally, for any $i < k$ and $x, y \in G_i$, consider $f(x) \mid f(x + y) - f(y)$.
Since $n_i \mid f(x)$ and $n_i \mid f(y)$, this necessarily implies $n_i \mid f(x + y)$.
Thus, we have $x + y \in G_i$.
This proves that $G_i$ is indeed a group.
