# IMO 2013 N3, "Generalized" Version

Denote by $\N$ the set of positive integers.
Let $S$ be a totally ordered set.
Fix a function $f : \N \to S$ such that $f(ab) = \max\{f(a), f(b)\}$ for all $a, b \in \N$.
Prove that there exists infinitely many positive integers n such that
$$ f(n^4 + n^2 + 1) = f((n + 1)^4 + (n + 1)^2 + 1). $$



# Solution

Official solution: <https://www.imo-official.org/problems/IMO2013SL.pdf>

We will not follow the official solution.
The only part the official solution has in common with this solution is the following equality for all $n \geq 2$:
$$ f(T(n^2)) = \max\{f(T(n - 1)), f(T(n))\}. $$
Here, we denote $T(n) = n^2 + n + 1$ for each $n \in \N$.

We say that a positive integer $n$ is $f$-good if $f(T(n^2)) = f(T((n + 1)^2))$, and $f$-bad otherwise.
Due to the above equation, a positive integer n ≥ 2 is f-good if and only if
$$ \max\{f(T(n - 1)), f(T(n))\} = max\{f(T(n)), f(T(n + 1))\}. $$
Next, we prove the following easy claim.

__Claim__:
For any $f$-bad positive integer $n$, if $f(T(n - 1)) \leq f(T(n))$, then $f(T(n)) < f(T(n + 1))$.

__Proof__:
If $f(T(n + 1)) \leq f(T(n))$, then
$$ max\{f(T(n - 1)), f(T(n))\} = max\{f(T(n)), f(T(n + 1))\} = T(n). $$
That means $n$ is $f$-good; a contradiction.
$\square$
    
Now suppose that there exists finitely many $f$-good positive integer.
Then there exists $N \geq 2$ such that any integer greater than or equal to $N$ is $f$-bad.
We divide into two cases:

1. There exists an integer $C \geq N$ such that $f(T(C - 1)) \leq f(T(C))$.

    One can show by induction, using the claim, that $f(T(k)) > f(T(C))$ for any $k > C$.
In particular $f(T(C - 1)) \leq f(T(C)) < f(T(C^2)) = \max\{f(T(C - 1)), f(T(C))\}$.
A contradiction.

2. For any $n \geq N$, we have $f(T(n - 1)) > f(T(n))$.

    Then one can show by induction that $f(T(k)) < f(T(N))$ for any $k > N$.
In particular $f(T(N - 1)) < f(T(N)) < f(T(N^2)) = max\{f(T(N - 1)), f(T(N))\}$.
This is again a contradiction.

Both cases yield a contradiction.
Thus, there must exist infinitely many good positive integers.



# Extra Notes

This generalization gives away the property $f(ab) = \max\{f(a), f(b)\}$ from the start.
In the original problem, one has to realize that the maximum divisor function satisfies this property and that it is important for the solution.
On the other hand, one has to work harder to achieve contradiction from the chain of inequalities in the general case.

The official solution relies on $f(T(n)) \neq f(T(n + 1))$ for all $n \in \N$, where
f is the largest prime divisor function as in the original problem.
We do not rely on this fact at all.

In the implementation, instead of using $n$ in the $f$-good predicate, we use $n + 1$.
