# IMO 2017 A6 (P2), Generalized Version

Let $F$ be an arbitrary field.
Determine all functions $f : F \to F$ such that, for all $x, y \in F$,
$$ f(f(x) f(y)) + f(x + y) = f(xy). $$



# Solution

## Case $char(F) \neq 2$

Reference: <https://artofproblemsolving.com/community/c6h1480146p8693244>

This is a solution in the AoPS thread for IMO 2017 P2 by __anantmudgal09__ (post #75).

The referenced solution extends to the case $char(F) \neq 2$.
We write our solution below for the case $char(F) = 2$.

## Case $char(F) = 2$

This solution also uses most of the results from the referenced solution.
Again, we are done if $f = 0$, and otherwise $f(0)^2 = 1$.
For the case $char(F) = 2$, this necessarily means $f(0) = 1$.
Other properties that we use for the case $f(0) = 1$ are as follows:
1. for all $x \in F$, $f(x + 1) = f(x) - 1 = f(x) + 1$,
2. for all $x \in F$, $f(x) = 0 \iff x = 1$,
3. if $f$ is injective, then $f(x) = 1 - x = x + 1$ for all $x \in F$.
Thus, it remains to prove that $f$ is indeed injective.

For any $c \neq 0$, the substitution $(x, y) = (c + 1, c^{-1} + 1)$ yields
$$ f(f(c + 1) f(c^{-1} + 1)) = 0 \to f(c + 1) f(c^{-1} + 1) = 1. $$
Thus, the main idea here is that instead of proving injectivity directly, we prove the following claim.

__Claim__:

For any $a, b \in F$, $f(a + 1) f(b + 1) = 1$ implies $ab = 1$.

First we show that injectivity follows from the claim.
Take any $a, b \in F$ such that $f(a) = f(b)$.
Replace $a$ and $b$ with $c + 1$ and $d + 1$, so $f(c + 1) = f(d + 1)$.
Since $f(x) = 0 \iff x = 1$, either we have $c = d = 0$ or $c, d \neq 0$.
In the latter case, we have $f(c + 1) f(d^{-1} + 1) = f(d + 1) f(d^{-1} + 1) = 1$.
Then $cd^{-1} = 1$, which implies $c = d$ and $a = b$.
This shows that $f$ is indeed injective; we would be done.
It remains to prove the claim.

__Proof of the claim__:

Consider an arbitrary $a, b \in F$ such that $f(a + 1) f(b + 1) = 1$.
For any such a and b, the substitution $(x, y) = (a + 1, b + 1)$ yields $f(a + b + 1) = f(a + b + ab)$.
Note that $a, b \neq 0$ since $f(1) = 0$, and we also have $f(a^{-1} + 1) f(b^{-1} + 1) = (f(a + 1) f(b + 1))^{-1} = 1$.
So, we have $f(a^{-1} + b^{-1} + 1) = f(a^{-1} + b^{-1} + (ab)^{-1})$ as well.

Now, compare the original equation with $(x, y) = (a + b + 1, a^{-1} + b^{-1} + 1)$ and with $(x, y) = (a + b + ab, a^{-1} + b^{-1} + (ab)^{-1})$.
The first summand on the left hand side are equal since $f(a + b + 1) = f(a + b + ab)$ and $f(a^{-1} + b^{-1} + 1) = f(a^{-1} + b^{-1} + (ab)^{-1})$.
Now, notice that $(a + b + 1)(a^{-1} + b^{-1} + 1)$ = $(a + b + ab)(a^{-1} + b^{-1} + (ab)^{-1})$; both sides are equal to $\frac{(a + b + 1)(a + b + ab)}{ab}$.
Hence, the right hand sides are also equal.
Thus, we get $f(a + b + a^{-1} + b^{-1}) = f(a + b + a^{-1} + b^{-1} + ab + (ab)^{-1})$.

It turns out that, for $(x, y) = (a + b^{-1} + 1, b + a^{-1} + 1)$, one has
$$ x + y = a + b + a^{-1} + b^{-1}, \quad xy = a + b + a^{-1} + b^{-1} + ab + (ab)^{-1} + 1. $$
Thus, the above substitution on the original equation yields $f(f(x) f(y)) = 1 \iff f(x) f(y) = 0$.
That is, either $f(a + b^{-1} + 1) = 0 \iff a + b^{-1} = 0$ or $f(b + a^{-1} + 1) = 0 \iff b + a^{-1} = 0$.
Both yields $ab = 1$, proving the claim.
$\square$


# Extra Notes

The real motivation for considering the equation $f(a + 1) f(b + 1) = 1$ is as follows.
Letting $g(x) = f(x + 1) = f(x) + 1$, one obtains $g(g(x) g(y)) + g(x + y) = g(xy + x + y)$ for all $x, y \in F$.
We also have $g(x + 1) = g(x) + 1$ for all $x \in F$.
From this equation, one can also get $g(x^{-1}) = g(x)^{-1}$ for any $x \neq 0$.
Considering the equation $g(a) = g(b)$ alone gets us nowhere.
So, instead, we consider the equation $g(a) g(b) = 1$ in hopes of proving that $ab = 1$ is necessary.
This turns out to work, as demonstrated above with $f$ in place of $g$.
