# IMO 2009 A7, Generalized Version

Let $R$ be a (not necessarily commutative) domain.
Find all functions $f : R \to R$ such that, for all $x, y \in R$,
$$ f(x f(x + y)) = f(f(x) y) + x^2. $$



# Answer

$f = x \mapsto x$ and $f = x \mapsto -x$.



# Solution

Official solution: <https://www.imo-official.org/problems/IMO2009SL.pdf>

Let $(*)$ denote the original equation.
We obtain (2) as in Solution 1.
Then we just proceed with Solution 2, except that after obtaining $|f(1)| = 1$, we WLOG assume that $f(1) = 1$.
Note that, if $f$ is a solution, then so is $-f$; this is true after obtaining that $f$ is odd.
However, we need an alternative proof of $f(0) = 0$ and the fact that $f$ is odd.

We prove that $f(0) = 0$.
Plugging $x = 0$ and $y = f(f(0))$ into $(*)$ yields $f(f(0) f(f(0))) = f(0)$.
Now plugging $x = f(0)$ and $y = 0$ yields $f(0) = f(0) + f(0)^2$.
So, $f(0)^2 = 0$ and thus $f(0) = 0$.
Next, plugging $y = 0$ into $(*)$ yields
$$ f(x f(x)) = x^2 \; \forall x \in R. \tag{1} $$

After obtaining (2), following Solution 2, we get that $f$ is injective.
Next, using injectivity, we show that $f$ is odd.
By (1), for any $x \in R$, $f(x f(x)) = x^2 = f(-x f(-x))$, so $x f(x) = -x f(-x)$.
For $x = 0$, we already have $f(x) = -f(-x) = 0$.
For $x \neq 0$, we can cancel out $x$ from both sides and get $-f(-x) = f(x)$.
This shows that $f$ is odd.

The rest of Solution 2 proves that $f$ must be either the identity or $x \mapsto -x$, when $char(R) \neq 2$.
For the case $char(R) = 2$, we present our solution below.
Note that we are still WLOG able to assume $f(1) = 1$.
In fact, in the case $char(R) = 2$, after obtaining $f(1)^2 = 1$, we already get $f(1) = 1$.
We also have $(1)$, $f(0) = 0$, and the fact that $f$ is injective and odd.

Plugging $y = 1$ into $(*)$ yields $f(f(x + 1)) = f(x) + 1$ for all $x \in R$.
Changing $x$ with $x + 1$ yields $f(f(x)) = f(x + 1) + 1$.
In particular, if we write $c = f(x)$ and $d = f(x + 1)$, then we have $f(c) = d + 1$ and $f(d) = c + 1$.
The main step is to get one information regarding any such pair $(c, d)$.
We claim that either $c = d$ or $c = d + 1$.

> __Claim__:
> Consider $c, d \in R$ such that $f(c) = d + 1$ and $f(d) = c + 1$.
> Then either $c = d$ or $c = d + 1$.
>
> __Proof__:
> Plugging $x = c$ and $y = c + 1$ into $(*)$ yields $d + 1 = f(c) = f((d + 1)(c + 1)) + c^2$.
> That is, we have $f((d + 1)(c + 1)) = c^2 + d + 1$.
> Similarly, we have $f((c + 1)(d + 1)) = d^2 + c + 1$.
> If $c + 1$ and $d + 1$ commutes, then we get $c^2 + d + 1 = d^2 + c + 1$.
> This is equivalent to $c^2 + d^2 = c + d$.
> Furthermore, since $c + 1$ and $d + 1$ commutes, one can check that $c$ and $d$ commutes as well.
> From this, one can prove that $c^2 + d^2 = (c + d)^2$, so $(c + d)^2 = c + d$.
> Since $R$ is a domain, we get either $c + d = 0$ or $c + d = 1$; both yields the claim.
> Thus, it remains to prove that $c + 1$ and $d + 1 = f(c)$ commutes.
> That is, $(c + 1) f(c) = f(c) (c + 1)$, or equivalently $c f(c) = f(c) c$.
>
> Recall from $(1)$ that $f(c f(c)) = c^2$.
> On the other hand, plugging $x = y = c$ into $(*)$ gives us $f(f(c) c) = c^2$.
> Injectivity yields $c f(c) = f(c) c$, as desired.

As a result, for any $x \in R$, we have either $f(x) = f(x + 1)$ or $f(x) = f(x + 1) + 1$.
The former is impossible since $f$ is injective.
We had $f(f(x)) = f(x + 1) + 1$, so the latter implies $f(x) = f(f(x))$.
Injectivity yields $f(x) = x$ for all $x \in R$, as desired.
