# IMO 2012 A5, Generalized Version

Let $R$ be an integral domain.
Find all functions $f : \R \to R$ such that, for all $x, y \in \R$,
$$ f(1 + xy) - f(x + y) = f(x) f(y). $$



# Answer

1. $f = 0$,
2. $f = x \mapsto \phi(x) - 1$ for some ring homomorphism $\phi : \R \to R$, and
3. $f = x \mapsto \phi(x^2) - 1$ for some semiring homomorphism $\phi : \R_{\geq 0} \to R$.

## Note

If $char(R) ≠ 0$, then there are no ring/semiring homomorphism from $\R$ or $\R_{\geq 0}$ to $R$.
In this case, the only answer is $f = 0$.

For the case $R = \R$, the identity map is the only ring endomorphism of $\R$.
The natural lift $x \in \R_{\geq 0} \mapsto x \in \R$ is the only semiring homomorphism $\R_{\geq 0} \to \R$.
Thus, there are three admissible functions: $0$, $x \mapsto x - 1$, and $x \mapsto x^2 - 1$.



# Solution

Official solution: <https://www.imo-official.org/problems/IMO2012SL.pdf>

We follow the official solution for the case $f(-1) \neq 0$, $char(R) \neq 2$.
Generalizing the solution allows us to prove that $f + 1$ is indeed a ring homomorphism.

For $char(R) = 2$, the solution works up to $g(x + 2) - g(x) = 2$, where $g = f + 1$.
Then, we get $f(x + 2) = f(x)$ since $g = f + 1$ and $2 = 0$ in $R$.
It yields $f(-1) = f(1) = 0$; a contradiction.

We will not work with $g = f + 1$ for the case $f(-1) ≠ 0$; we will only use $f$ for our solution.
We will deal with the case $f(-1) = 0$ below.

## Case $f(-1) = 0$

Plugging $y = -1$ and replacing $x$ with $x + 1$ reveals that $f$ is even.
In particular, we have $f(1) = f(-1) = 0$.
Plugging $y = 0$ into the original equation now gives us $f(x) f(0) = -f(x)$ for all $x \in \R$.
Thus, either $f = 0$ or $f(0) = -1$.
From now on, assume that $f(0) = -1$.

Since $f$ is even, there exists a (unique) function $g : \R_{\geq 0} \to R$ such that $f(x) = g(x^2)$ for all $x \in \R$.
Such $g$ is defined by $g(x) = f(\sqrt{x})$ for all $x \geq 0$.
The original equation now becomes
$$ g((1 + xy)^2) - g((x + y)^2) = g(x^2) g(y^2). \tag{1} $$

Changing $y with $-y$ at (1) and comparing with (1) gives us
$$ g((1 + xy)^2) - g((1 - xy)^2) = g((x + y)^2) - g((x - y)^2). $$
Now note that, for every $u, v \geq 0$, there exists $x, y \in \R$ such that $u = (x - y)^2$ and $v = 4xy$.
For example, one can take $x = \frac{\sqrt{u + v} + \sqrt{u}}{2}$ and $y = \frac{\sqrt{u + v} - \sqrt{u}}{2}$.
Thus, for all $u, v \geq 0$,
$$ g((1 + v/4)^2) - g((1 - v/4)^2) = g(u + v) - g(u). $$
In particular, the left hand side is also equal to g(v) - g(0), so for all u, v ≥ 0,
$$ g(u + v) = g(u) + g(v) - g(0). $$
Since $$ g(0) = f(0) = -1$, this means $g + 1$ is a monoid homomorphism $\R_{\geq 0} \to R$.
For convenience, denote $\phi = g + 1$.

Since $\phi$ is an monoid homomorphism, (1) now becomes reads as
$$ 1 + \phi((xy)^2) - \phi(x^2) - \phi(y^2) = (\phi(x^2) - 1) (\phi(y^2) - 1). $$
Note that $\phi(1) = 1$ since $g(1) = f(1) = 0$.

Rearranging gives us $\phi((xy)^2) = \phi(x^2) \phi(y^2)$ for any $x, y \in \R$.
So, $\phi$ is also multiplicative, which means $\phi$ is in fact a semiring homomorphism.
It is easy to check that the converse is true: for any semiring homomorphism $\phi : \R_{\geq 0} \to R$, the map $x \mapsto \phi(x^2) + 1$ satisfies the original equation.



# Extra Notes

The original question also contained the condition $f(-1) \neq 0$.
It turns out to be unnecessary for the problem to be solvable.

Some results in the `A5.lean` file still uses `sorry`.
Any help in filling the gaps will be much appreciated.
