# IMO 2015 A4 (P5), Generalized Version
  
Let $R$ be a (non-trivial, not necessarily commutative) domain.
Find all functions $f : R \to R$ such that, for all $x, y \in R$,
$$ f(x + f(x + y)) + f(xy) = x + f(x + y) + f(x) y. $$



# Answer

$f = x \mapsto x$ and $f = x \mapsto 2 - x$.



# Solution

Official solution: <http://www.imo-official.org/problems/IMO2015SL.pdf>

Instead of working with $f$, we work with the function $x \mapsto f(x) - x$.
That is, we will solve the following functional equation instead:
$$ f(f(x + y) + 2x + y) = f(x) y - f(xy). \tag{*} $$
It suffices to prove that f satisfies $(*)$ if and only if $f = 0$ or $f = x \mapsto 2 - 2x$.

The official solution works for the case $char(R) \neq 2$.
Even in the general case where $R$ is not necessarily commutative, no modification is needed.
We rearrange this solution for our new functional equation, which we present below.
We also present our own solutionution for the case $char(R) = 2$.

Plugging $y = 1$ and replacing $x$ with $x - 1$ into $(*)$ yields
$$ ∀ x \in R, \quad f(f(x) + 2x - 1) = 0. \tag{1} $$
Plugging $x = 0$ into $(*)$ yields
$$ ∀ y \in R, f(y + f(y)) = (y - 1) f(0). \tag{2} $$
For the case $f(0) \neq 0$, this means that $f(y) = 0$ implies $y = 1$.
In particular, $(1)$ yields $f(x) = 2 - 2x$ for all $x \in R$.
We will split the case $char(R) \neq 2$ and $char(R) = 2$ for the case $f(0) = 0$.

## Case $char(R) \neq 2$

Plugging $x = 0$ into $(1)$ yields $f(-1) = 0$.
Plugging $x = 1$ and $y = -1$ into $(*)$ afterwards yields $2f(1) = 0 \to f(1) = 0$.
Now, plugging $x = 1$ into $(*)$ yields
$$ ∀ y \in R, \quad f(f(y + 1) + y + 2) = -f(y). \tag{3} $$
In particular, if $f(y) = 0$ and $f(y + 1) = 0$, then $f(y + 2) = 0$.

Plugging $y = 0$ into $(*)$ now yields $f(f(x) + 2x) = 0$ for all $x \in R$.
Combined with $(1)$ and $(3)$, we get
$$ ∀ x \in R, \quad f(f(x) + 2x + 1) = 0. $$
Now, if we plug $y = -1$ into $(*)$ and use $(4)$, we get $0 = f(f(x - 1) + 2x - 1) = -f(x) - f(-x)$ for all $x \in R$.
That is, $f$ is odd.

Finally, plugging $x = -1$ and replacing $y$ with $-y$ into $(*)$ yields $-f(y) = f(f(-y - 1) - y - 2) = -f(f(y + 1) + y + 2)$ for all $y \in R$.
Combined with $(3)$, we get $f(y) = 0$ for all $y \in R$.
  
## Case $char(R) = 2$

Proceed equally in case $f(0) \neq 0$.
From now on, assume that $f(0) = 0$.
Equation $(*)$ becomes
$$ f(f(x + y) + y) = f(x) y + f(xy). \tag{5} $$
Plugging $x = y = 1$ into $(5)$ yields $f(1) = 0$.
Now, plugging $x = y + 1$ into $(5)$ yields $f(y) = f(y + 1) y + f(y^2 + y)$.
Replacing $y$ with $y + 1$, we get $f(y + 1) + f(y) (y + 1) = f(y^2 + y) = f(y) + f(y + 1) y$.
This means, for any $y \in R$, we have
$$ f(y + 1) (y + 1) = f(y) y. \tag{6} $$

Now, plugging $y = 0$ into $(5)$ yields $f(f(x)) = 0$.
Plugging $x = 0$ into $(5)$ yields $f(f(y) + y) = 0$.
Then, plugging x = f(y) into (5) yields $f(f(y) y) = f(y)$ for all $y \in R$.
By $(6)$, we have f(y + 1) = f(f(y + 1) (y + 1)) = f(f(y) y) = f(y)$.
Thus, for any $y \in R$, we have $f(y) (y + 1) = f(y) y$, and so f(y) = 0$, as desired.



# Extra Notes

In the original formulation, we have $y f(x)$ instead of $f(x) y$.
The identity function satisfy the equation in that case if and only if $R$ is commutative.
Changing $y f(x)$ to $f(x) y$ removes the necessity of $R$ being commutative.

We also have an alternative solution for the case $char(R) = 2$ that works when $R$ is commutative.
See below; we will not implement this alternative solution.

## Alternative Solution

We assume that $char(R) = 2$ and $R$ is commutative.
Note that we will always have $f(0) = 0$ in this case.

Plugging $y = 0$ into $(5)$ yields $f(f(x)) = 0$ for all $x \in R$.
Plugging $x = 0$ into $(5)$ yields $f(f(y) + y) = 0$ for all $y \in R$ instead.
Plugging $x = f(y)$ into $(5)$, combined with the previous two equalities, yields $f(f(y) y) = f(y)$ for all $y \in R$.
Plugging $y = f(x)$ into $(5)$ instead gives us $f(xf(x)) + f(x)^2 = 0$.
Thus we have $f(x)^2 = f(x f(x)) = f(x)$ for all $x \in R$.
That is, we have $f(x) \in \{0, 1\}$ for all $x \in R$.

Finally, suppose for the sake of contradiction that $f(t) = 1$ for some $t \in R$.
Plugging $x = y = t$ into $(5)$ yields $f(t^2) = t + 1 \in \{0, 1\}$, so $t \in \{0, 1\}$.
But $f(0) = 0$, and $f(f(x)) = 0$ yields $f(1) \neq 1$, which means $f(1) = 0$.
Contradiction; this implies $f = 0$, as desired.