# IMO 2017 N7 (P6)

Let $n$ be a positive integer and $(x_1, y_1), (x_2, y_2), \ldots, (x_n, y_n)$ be distinct pairs of coprime integers.
Show that there exists a non-constant homogenous polynomial $f : \Z[X, Y]$ such that $f(x_i, y_i) = 1$ for each $i \leq n$.



# Solution

Official solution: <http://www.imo-official.org/problems/IMO2017SL.pdf>

We follow the idea from Solution 2 of the official solution, with simplifications.
First induct on $n$; the base case $n = 1$ is easy since $x_1$ is coprime with $y_1$.
For the induction step, let $(x_1, y_1), \ldots, (x_n, y_n), (c, d)$ be pairs of distinct coprime integers, $n \geq 1$.
By the induction hypothesis, there exists a non-constant homogenous $g \in \Z[X, Y]$ such that $g(x_i, y_i) = 1$ for all $i \leq n$.

Take some $u, v \in \Z$ such that $uc + vd = 1$.
Set $h(X, Y) = \prod_{i \leq n} (y_i X - x_i Y)$.
We take the desired polynomial to be of form $f = g^K + Mh (uX + vY)^L$ for some $K, L \geq 0$ and $M \in \Z$.
Since $g(x_i, y_i) = 1$ and $h(x_i, y_i) = 0$ for each $i \leq n$, it is easy to see that $f(x_i, y_i) = 1$ for each $i \leq n$.
On the other hand, evaluating at $(c, d)$ gives us $f(c, d) = g(c, d)^K + M h(c, d)$ since $uc + vd = 1$.
The homogeneity condition on $f$ reads as $K \deg(g) = n + L$.
Given $K$, for a suitable $M$ such that $f(c, d) = 1$ to exists, it suffices that $h(c, d) \mid g(c, d)^K - 1$.
The homogeneity condition is satisfied for some $L$ if and only if $n \leq K \deg(g)$.
Thus, it remains to show that there exists $K \geq 0$ such that $n \leq K \deg(g)$ and $h(c, d) \mid g(c, d)^K - 1$.

We do one more reduction; it in fact suffices just to prove that $g(c, d)$ and $h(c, d)$ are coprime.
Indeed, if $h(c, d) = 0$, then $g(c, d) = \pm 1$ and we can take $K = 2n$.
Otherwise, one can then take $K = n \phi(|h(c, d)|)$.
The inequality $n \leq K \deg(g)$ is immediate since $h(c, d) \neq 0$ and $g$ is non-constant.
Meanwhile, $g(c, d)^K \equiv 1 \pmod{h(c, d)}$ is now immediate by the Fermat-Euler theorem.
So, now it remains to show that $g(c, d)$ and $h(c, d)$ are indeed coprime.

Take any prime $p$ and suppose that $p \mid h(c, d)$.
Since $h(X, Y) = \prod_{i \leq n} (y_i X - x_i Y)$, this means $p \mid y_i c - x_i d$ for some $i \leq n$.
By case division, one can check that $(c, d)$ and $(x_i, y_i)$ are linearly dependent modulo $p$, say $\overline{(c, d)} = \alpha \overline{(x_i, y_i)}$ for some $\alpha \in \F_p$ non-zero.
Then $\overline{g(c, d)} = \alpha^{\deg(g)} \overline{g(x_i, y_i)} = \alpha^{\deg(g)} \neq 0$.
This shows that $p \nmid g(c, d)$; we are done.



# Implementation notes

We represent the two-variable polynomials using `mv_polynomial bool ℤ`.
In particular, we have to represent the pairs using `bool → ℤ`.

There is no need to assume `0 < n`; the case `n = 0` is trivial.
Notice that in the above solution, we do not assume $(c, d) \neq \pm (x_i, y_i)$ for all $i \leq n$.
There is no need to do this either in the `.lean` file.
